good evening I am starting a new key
worker bowl within the NHS next week
however my only means of getting there
is by using public transport what can we
do to ensure that all key workers that
have no choice but to utilize probably
transport we've detected both at work
and on their commute
well Daniel first of all congrats on
starting your new key worker role Mik as
head of the RMT let me start with you
well first thing I think we should do
for key workers is make sure they can
travel free on our network you know they
have particularly NHS workers they're
actually providing a hugely important
task and what we want to make sure after
the Union and the Raelians have been
sitting down working with the Raelians
she makes sure it's safe to travel on
the network and do you think it is safe
well some of the pictures have seen that
in the last few days now with the
overcrowding with the congestion that's
been on platforms and trains no we we
had a plan as a as an industry that the
government threw into disarray when they
decided to release the easement of
lockdown so that we got more people
using the railways than we planned for
and that's putting everybody who should
include pedometer key workers at risk of
travelling because as I've acquired and
particularly at peak time so we want to
make sure we have a regular service they
increase in the amount of trains next
week
so that should make it safer if you've
got more trains running with less people
you have the ability to have social
distancing and keep safe and we want to
make sure that people feel safe and can
travel get to and from work the route
the rail network bus network have been
operating completely throughout this
crisis and I think we should praise all
those workers have been doing that
activity one of the things I've learnt
from this particular crisis is the
amount of people that actually ensure
that we as a society can run an operate
that's NHS workers care workers
transport workers shop workers and they
all need to have the opportunity to get
to work safely and can I just ask you me
there was all you have been reported
saying that that you'll recommend a
strong
if it's not made safer now what we said
and we've got some real concerns about
overcrowding and the fact that you
cannot have two meters distance in on
crowded trains it's not safe this talk
of a strike is what we've said is that
if if the trains are overcrowded if our
members are put at risk then we're
saying to them like any worker who has
the legal right to protect themselves
get to a place of safety and get out of
harm's way
because some of the things that we've
seen some of the message would seem from
the government is actually encouraging
people whether they think it or not to
get onto trains get make platforms and
trains and buses that crowded and
putting those workers at risk so we're
saying no if you if you face like that
step back but that could mean
uncertainty circumstances trains were to
be stopped mine worse my wife works in
the NHS every day at a hospital that has
Kovac patients and she's wondering why
if she's having to do that why rail
workers for example who you know the
drivers are in in their cabin so what
why are they more at risk than the
health workers it's not necessarily
they're more at risk but do you think
they should be equally at risk well I
don't know what safe means when people
say safe do they mean absolutely safe in
every possible way
he's 2 meters social distancing
scientifically proven to keep us safe I
think you know all this obsession about
being safe all the time is not realistic
in a busy city like London is I have to
say I mean you need to get your facts
right there because you know you're 16
more times likely to get car and virus
and die if you're a London bus worker
then you are an HHS worker and there's
been 28 plus 28 bus workers in London 40
42 TfL workers died in London there's
been 10 the rail rail workers and plus
one British Transport working died of
the Krone of ours that we know of and we
know that is a lot of underreporting in
terms of the impact of the corona virus
and
so how are people to get to work well
what we've planned to do and what we
look to do is to make it as safe as
possible and we actually had a plan to
do that we had the situation where we've
got 50% of trains operate in this moment
in time next week that was going to go
up to 70% and there going to be a
gradual increase that were meant that
you could accommodate more and more
people traveling to and from work and
that has been put under for under a
threat by the way the government I've
released the message map people are so
so mixed saying they had a plan the
government jumped a week early well
firstly congratulations to Daniel on his
new job and picking up on mix point he
talks about the capacity being low at
the moment so the first thing we need to
do for people like Daniel is to get the
services up and running to expand the
capacity back to normal so we have more
trains running more buses running so
there's more capacity then we need to
encourage those who don't need to use
public transport to walk to cycle where
they can a very large number of people
42 percent of people their commute is
less than three miles if we can increase
particularly in areas like London the
number of people that are walking and
cycling that again takes pressure off
capacity to help people like Daniel as
key workers the third thing we need to
do yes in terms of in the House of
Commons quite often I would walk to work
and what we've done coming back to
Daniel's point though in terms of part
of its capacity part of it is
encouraging others and we put investment
for example into cycling
to encourage more cycling as part of
that but the third thing we need to do
is then have guidance for people that
are using the tube support for summer
mix workers in terms of PPE where that's
appropriate in order that we can use
that capacity as safely as possible but
the varlet Ernest is cycling we've seen
a massive increase okay in the use of
cycling and that's why we put additional
savings to support it we just I just
feed you some messages we've had in here
Tara's saying is it inevitable we will
face a second wave given the
overcrowding we've seen on public
transport
Elgar saying or after seeing a large
number of people on the tube should the
government make it compulsory to wear
face coverings on all public transport
habits saying the scenes on public
transit this week have been horrific
with people in tubes and buses crowned
with no social distancing
it in other european cities i mean in in
in in berlin in milan in paris they've
introduced things on the on the metro
for example where their sticker saying
where you can and you cannot sit places
where you can stand when you where you
can't in berlin you have to have a
ticket if you want to go in during
russia for example is that something the
government is considering well the in
the guy knows there's lots of sensible
things we can encourage people to do is
I use contactless payment for example
legislate for every single fact of life
in every single circumstances are things
that can be done face coverings the
advice on sage is for things such as
public transport for very short periods
of time it is something that they're now
recommending but there's lots of
measures in the guidance such as content
lists that can be used but the best
thing to do is to increase the capacity
that's why we need to see for example in
London
TfL getting more tubes running than they
have at the moment when negotiations
with them to do so that's also why we
put 3.5 billion additional into the rail
in order to again get that capacity
going but can I just say that was a sort
of plan that we had about increasing
capacity but also putting a key
messaging out but the government jumped
the gun I mean it to turn around and say
let's we can get them at bike sounds
like it's from the Mariana 20 school of
crisis management let news bikes that I
can solve our problems you said yourself
make that services work fifty percent
the first thing for people like Daniel
who is trying to get to work again it's
not just about London it's about for
example light rail in many of our cities
getting that light rail capacity that is
used by many key workers and the key
thing is to get as many of those
services we have put for nibble we need
your why did you why did you turn round
when we sat down and worked it to spent
two weeks of hard work making sure that
we could have a plan for over a period
of time to allow proper services safe
services did the government jump the gun
after the Prime Minister's speech on
Friday Sunday we saw an increase in
usage on the rail network and we saw
people our members actually have to deal
with real problems about passengers we
had one example of a passenger crying
because she was worried
about an issue of social distance
another train where had too many people
turned up because of what the prime
minister said on Sunday we hadn't
expected that we've done a deal that's
weird last week which has had an
incremental change a phasing in of
improvements on train services increased
capacity but also allowing safe
increased capacity and the government
jumped the gun it's like the left hand
doesn't know what the right ends doing
we're talking the DFT that are they
talking to number ten DFT me the
Department for transducer let me just
bring in Devi in Edinburgh listening to
all this what's your view yeah I just
think it's tragic that were in this
situation I mean this the this issue
about safety and all this could have
been dealt with many weeks ago other
countries have stayed open they've
stayed saved by actually having public
health infrastructure in place to
actually detect who has the virus that
when you do travel you know that
actually you're not gonna be exposing
others that actually we know who has the
virus into a dozen and we can make sure
they're isolated
so I guess listening to this debate is
it safe currently to go on public
transport I don't think so
is it safe to open schools I don't think
so because we don't have them place the
basic building blocks of surveillance
Doc's you know who has the virus and if
the lockdown basically you know it
starts opening up now before we have the
infrastructure in place it's basically
pointless in the sense of actually you
should use the time to build the
infrastructure actually when you lift
lockdown then you're in a better
position than you were when you went in
and the thing I'm trying to get my head
around is in the past eight weeks that
we've been in a lockdown that is costly
that is crude that you know very drastic
in terms of the economic and social
effects as well as the effects on me um
you know non-essential services in the
NHS what is fundamentally changed in the
past eight weeks to put us in a better
position to open up so we're gonna see
his cases are gonna go up we expect now
the virus is gonna continue spreading
and a few weeks we're gonna have this
exact same debate again and it just
feels like it feels quite tragic
Bridgette would you travel on the
two-bit mode I think this comes down to
the need for government to provide clear
guidance to all of us it isn't just
about individual choices and what we saw
on Sunday with the prime minister's
statement and what followed was an
unfortunate pattern of confusion that I
think has left a lot of people wondering
what the right thing is to do it is
quite reasonable that
workers should expect a safe working
environment and that has to be done
carefully it has to be done properly it
has to be worked through with those
affected with trade unions - and I don't
think giving people such little notice
that they could return to work has
helped in that way there's also of
course the big issue that lots of
workers face real problems around what
that will mean for childcare while
school schools remain closed in large
part other than to key workers children
and vulnerable children the government's
response to that is to expect employers
to just negotiate that on a case-by-case
basis now of course the vast majority of
businesses and employers will want to do
the right thing and they're responsible
but I don't think such big decisions
that have an effect on all of us
can be left so unclear I think we needed
a clearer direction from government and
this confusion is really costly
specifically on transport do you think
it's too early then to be opening up the
economy for more workers we going on
public transport do you think that's too
soon
we recognize that there needs to be a
phased move to greater economic activity
was too soon now I think it is
unfortunate the Prime Minister made a
statement on Sunday with no guidance to
back that up without a clearly thought
through plan about how that could be
achieved I mean we've heard this evening
from Mick that if the government was to
work more closely with trade unions with
businesses and to try and find a more
sensible way of doing things I think
that would leave people feeling safer
because it's just too soon then at the
moment no what we want to see is that to
be done in a careful and gradual way so
yes where people can avoid public
transport they should do so steve is
right to say that but it shouldn't rest
on individuals simply making that
decision we do have personal judgment
and discretion yes but the absence of
clear direction from government is
damaging big's I just came from you oh I
think one of the unfortunate things this
happened is that the country has got
petrified you know we're the most
nervous large nation of any so the
government's propaganda has frightened
us rigid and we have the second highest
debts at the moment so people may be
happy yes you are how many people who
have no other morbidities under the age
of 60 have died from this illness you
have
morbidities yeah cuz I can tell you how
many people under 65 have valid and
office it will be me well let's survive
their morbidity doesn't mean you're a
hundred and fifty you're more likely to
drown the four hundred people a year
that drowned right so I think we have to
get things a bit in context what offer
to the families of those people every
death is tragic but believe me we are
entering we're already in the largest
recession for 300 years in fact it's not
just one recession the Bank of England
have said the the economy will shrink by
fourteen percent that's the equivalent
of two recessions it's a depression and
I wouldn't be surprised if we have two
million more unemployed people within a
year imagine the agony of two million
more unemployed people how many deaths
might flow from that how many deaths are
flowing from the fact that we've got
half as many a and E appointments at the
moment cancer patients not being seen
people with heart disease not being seen
and the collateral damage of this
campaign of fear and lockdown has to be
taken into account very soon I believe
lockdown would be causing more deaths
than the virus and just to be clear so
in terms of deaths amongst those under
65 in total related to coronavirus
that's it's it's over four thousand you
see some of those okay but some of those
with comorbidities it's not to say that
they were gonna die anyway they just
have other conditions that they live
with Daniel I'm gonna come back to in a
minute Devi you were shaking your head
there yeah again I just wanna come back
to the point we keep putting economic
the economy versus public health and I
think that's a mistake these are both on
the same side containment is good for
public health it is good for the economy
and that's what we're seeing through the
countries that moved early that locked
down fast that actually took the drastic
measures contain the virus and then are
able to open up now and I think having
these kind of debates in February and
March is what has created such confusion
so what is the government strategy is it
to let the virus run through try to stay
with an NHS capacity and you know
basically think that's gonna save the
economy and we're learning that's not
the right way the right way is actually
get on top of the spires
we have to stay in lockdown longer stay
in lockdown longer do it right ease it
and it's a one-way street right now the
prom we're gonna face is if we open it's
not like the virus magically disappears
it's gonna still be around and so what
that means is it's gonna continue
spreading at some point NHS capacity is
gonna be strained we've already lost
60,000 people I guess or maybe 10% the
way through this if we're if we're
fortunate we'll find out soon we have a
long way to go and the way to do this is
that key to stay in lockdown get out
properly it's one-way street and stop
putting the economy versus public health
they're both on the same side let me
come back to Daniel gently so what do
you think of what you've heard I mean
coming back to your original question
about public transport but secondly I
think we keep hearing a similar rhetoric
from people like Steven government still
crowded that means that we need more
action and the government needs to work
collaboratively with trade unions and
other parties to try and solve it Steve
you want to come back in there yeah well
I mean that the whole point of the
government strategy has been to get the
are down and thanks to the efforts of
the British public we have done so that
through the scientific advice is now
enabled us to have a gradual phasing
which is what we've set out where we
have a gradual phasing where we switch
back on the economy we retail in June
we're there is like hospitality in July
but it is conditional it's conditional
on is keeping that infection rate down
and where I do agree is it's not a
choice between health and the economy
because the second peak of infection
would be hugely damaging from an
economic point of view that goodno the
Bank of England was saying a very
similar point last night in terms of the
effect that would have on public
confidence so we do need to get the
infection down that is why that we've
taken the unprecedented measures but we
now need to have a phased approach to
the economy conditional on climb you
know we may well come back the economy
shortly
[Music]
you